# Introduction to Java

## JDK

- <strong>javac</strong> : Java compiler. Converts `.java` file to `.class` files, which contains the `bytecode`.
- <strong>java</strong> : Launcher. Creates the java virtual machine and executes the program.
- <strong>jar</strong> : Packager. Package the java and related files, and run the package.
- <strong>javadoc</strong> : Generates documentation.

`Note:` Since Java 11, JRE is no longer available as a standalone download or as a part of JDK. Currently full JDK can be used to run a program, instead of having JRE separately. `jlink` can be used to create a executable which contains the required pieces of JRE to run the application.

## Features of Java

- <strong>Object oriented</strong> : Everything in the Java world are treated as objects, defined in classes. Although functional programming in Java is becoming widely popular, but still objects are the main focus of the language.
- <strong>Encapsulation</strong> : Java has access modifiers which protect data from unintended access and modification.
- <strong>Platform independent</strong> : Java compiler compiles the class files to bytecode, which can run on any operating system which has java. Hence, java .class files are portable.
- <strong>Robust</strong> : Automatic garbage collection.
- <strong>Simple</strong> : No pointers and operator overloading in Java.
- <strong>Secure</strong> : Java runs inside JVM and does not have access to system memory outside its boundary.
- <strong>Multithreading</strong> : Java has its own threading library to run multiple peices of code at the same time.

## Java class structure

- <strong>Class</strong> : Blueprint of an object. The `members` of a class are as follows:<br/>
    - <strong>Fields</strong> :  Defines the state of an object.
    - <strong>Methods</strong> :  Defines the behavior of an object, and operates on the state of an object.
- <strong>Object</strong>: Runtime instance of a class in memory.

`keyword`: Words having speacial meaning. Cannot be used in a program besides its intended purpose. 

`parameter`: Information supplied to a method.

`method signature`: Method name + Parameters

`method declaration`: Method name + Parameters + Return type

## Comments

- <strong>Single-line comments</strong>: Starting with `//` and anything after it in a line is commented out.

- <strong>Multi-line comments</strong>: Enclosed in `/*` and `*/`, and spans multiple lines. 

- <strong>Documentation comments</strong>: Similar to multi-line comments, but begins with `/**` instead. Picked up by `javadoc` to generate documentation.

## Class vs File

There can be multiple classes in the same file. But if a class name is declared public, then the file name should be the same as the class name.

## main() method

The main method is the entry point of a program. 

```java
public static void main(String[] args)
```

`public`: Access modifier, makes sure the main method is visible to the JVM. This implies the class also has appropriate access modifier.

`static`: Allows main method to be invoked without creating an object of the class.

`void`: Return type.

`main`: Method identifier.

`String[] args`: Command-line arguments. Can also be written as: <br/>
- String args[]
- String ... args

In place of `args` we can use any other paramter name.

## Running a java program

The following 2 commands are required to compile and run a java program.

```cmd
javac <classname>.java
java <classname>
```

Since java 11, we can also run a single file using a single command. This is called `single-file source-code command`.

```cmd
java <classname>.java
```

| Traditional command | single-file source-code command |
|---------------------|---------------------------------|
| Generates a class file. | Compiles in-memory. |
| For any program. | For a program with single file. |
| Can import any code from any java library. | Can only import from JDK provided libraries. |

<br/>

## Packages

Packages provide a way to logically organize the classes in a java program.

Defining packages:

```java
package com.example.demo;
```

Importing package:

```java
import com.example.demo.DemoClass;
```

Using wildcard to import all classes from a package:

```java
import com.example.demo.*;
```

`Note:` Using a wildcard does not load the classes from sub-packages. We also cannot import non-static methods or non-static fields. Also some import like the below one is invalid. 2 wildcards cannot be used like this.

```java
import com.example.demo.*.*;
```

### Naming conflicts

We can have classes with same name in different packages and use the relevant import wherever necessary.

Compiler will throw an error if the class to be used becomes ambiguous like in the below scenarios.

```java
import java.sql.*;
import java.util.*;
...
    Date date = new Date();
...
```

```java
import java.sql.Date;
import java.util.Date;
...
    Date date;
...
```

But the following code snippet does not cause any issue, because an explicit import takes precedence over wildcard imports.

```java
import java.sql.*;
import java.util.Date;
...
    Date date;
...
```

In case we have to use both the classes in the same file, we may use fully qualified class name.

```java
import java.sql.*;
import java.util.Date;
...
    Date date;
    java.sql.Date date;
...
```

### Building files in multiple packages

Suppose we have the following java files, where the main method is defined in ClassB, and ClassB has a dependency on ClassA.

```
packagea
    |--ClassA.java
packageb
    |--ClassB.java
```

Since, we have multiple files, we have to first compile the classes using the below command.

```cmd
javac packagea/ClassA.java packageb/ClassB.java
```

By default the classes get built in the same directory as the source code. To build the code to a custom path, add the target directory with `-d` option as shown below.

```cmd
javac -d classes packagea/ClassA.java packageb/ClassB.java
```

To provide the class path while running the program, we can use any of the below 3 options.

```
-cp <classpath>

-classpath <classpath>

--class-path <classpath>
```

So finally to run the application we can use the below command.

```cmd
java -cp classes packageb.ClassB
```

## Java class structure

Generally we will encounter the following order of elements in a java class.

- Package declaration
- Import statements
- Class declaration
- Field declarations
- Method declarations
